Heart to heart with rookie board members

I got appointed as a director on a company’s board of directors for the first time in January 2012, I was 29 years old and had heard the term fiduciary duty for the very first time.
The company in question was Inbox Business Technologies, Pakistan’s largest system integrator / technology services company by revenue. My appointment happened because Dawood Hercules Group (DH) owned a majority stake in Inbox and I was working with DH to launch a private equity firm called Cyan.
I remember being overwhelmed, not knowing where to turn for advice. The existing set of directors who I had interacted with didn’t have a uniform understanding of what it meant to be a good director. So I naturally turned to the web as I do for everything else. I came across two books I) Boards that Lead and II) CEO’s Boss. While the text was prescriptive and relevant I had a really hard time figuring out how to draw the line between “being strategic” and “being too operational”.
In the years to come DH ended up appointing me on the boards of their most important companies including Engro Corporation and Engro Foods. I’m still not sure what I did right and what I did wrong, unfortunately a method to evaluate a director’s performance doesn’t exist or when it does is rarely implemented. However, I wish there existed a write-up back then for rookie or first time board members. This is that write up and contains some advice for first time directors.

1. Read the board materials thoroughly and make notes
As obvious as that sounds, at least in my experience I found that most directors at best skimmed through board materials as opposed to a diligent read. This was reflected in many questions they asked which were actually addressed in the pack. Now it is the Management’s job to prepare a precise pack but it’s unfair to put the entire responsibility on Management. Boards need to do their part and it starts with diligent reading, note taking and research.

2. Invest time in really getting to know the CEO outside the board room
Group mentality really kicks in during board meetings. The most influential or loudest voice often ends up trumping the group’s opinion and that leads to pretty wild swings on opinions related to some very important matters. Getting to know the CEO outside the board room helps in understanding what the board is talking about and what “really needs to be talked about”. The latter cannot be had in a formal boardroom like environment.

3. Get to know the company’s customers and competitors
Board meetings are often a one way communication where Management tells the board what’s going on. Very often, boards have no way of verifying whether assumptions proposed by Management are indeed inline with industry norms. Specifically pay attention to situations where company’s performance is not in line with the industry’s. I recall one company I was involved with, in a year where the entire industry made money, the company I was associated with lost money. Primarily because their cost base was so far off from industry norms.

4. “Grilling” Management or “making a point” is not the point
Very often board meetings become an interrogation. There are some nice catch phrases directors will use such as “this is a board room and not a court room”. That said, the hardest part in being a rookie director is in trying really hard to convince others and yourself that you indeed add value. There’s a tendency to start grilling management unnecessarily to show that you add value. I surely did that. I was fortunate to have worked with an amazing CEO who helped me reform and realize that I couldn’t truly get effective if I wasn’t comfortable in my own skin.

5. Stop trying to justify your presence to yourself
Insecurities kick in for a rookie director in a pretty big way. I found myself often thinking “wow I don’t belong here” or “how on earth did I get here”. That insecurity often leads to unnatural behavior which is usually guided by pleasing the popular opinion in the room. That’s exactly what one must not do. Instead I found that holding my own and sharing what my authentic self truly thought proved most valuable for stakeholders involved.

6. Your duty is towards all stakeholders and not just shareholders
Directors are appointed by shareholders and shareholders can fire directors. This often leads to a view, as it did with me, that allegiance is solely with shareholders. Such a view is shortsighted because unless all stakeholders, particularly Management, believe that everyone is playing on the same team, incentives can never be aligned. Therefore, optimizing asks for shareholders alone is often a recipe for disaster.

7. Fire the CEO if you feel you must get too “operational”
There’s a thin line between strategic decisions and operational decisions. Pricing a product may be an operational decision for many businesses but the thought process behind setting prices is indeed a strategic decision. Sitting on the sidelines and saying “well I’ve given my input” is not enough. If sh*t is about to hit the fan, then be prepared to roll sleeves and let the CEO know that you are a resource who is available to put up a fight if needed. Too many directors continue to sit on the sidelines because sometimes it’s just too convenient to focus solely on the “big picture”.

That said, the most important decision a board makes is hiring the CEO. If a CEO isn’t executing properly then don’t be afraid to fire the CEO.

8. Insist on director evaluations, if not formalized, ask for your own evaluation after every meeting
I love how Ray Dalio runs his meetings and how participants can rank each other’s input on a set of criterion. The same must be done for board meetings. If you are a rookie director, you are very fortunate and you must try to be the best director you can be. This can’t happen without feedback. It’s very hard to obtain tangible feedback and if such mechanism don’t exist, then seek feedback any way possible.

9. Listen to understand and respond as opposed to gloss over and react.
This goes back to insecurities and being worried that “you don’t belong”. Perhaps the worst attribute I’ve seen from directors is being verbose and not listening to understand but instead listening to react. Very often one runs into directors who are there to outshine others and make Management look bad in order to justify their own self worth. Such directors are awful for companies and the only purpose they serve is to satisfy their own fragile egos.

10. There’s no right answer!
In all my research to understand what makes a good director I ended up finding more questions than answers. I concluded that there’s no right answer. So long as you can be authentic, put in the effort, be prepared, get to know the stakeholders involved and provide input that’s genuinely in the company’s best interest you will end up doing a really great job.
